**Influence of Medical representatives on prescribing pattern in
different Countries (Ethiopia, Nigeria, Yemen and Turkey)**

**Influence of Medical Representatives on Prescribing Practices in
Mekelle, Northern Ethiopia \[1\]**

\- Objective: assess the influence of MRs on prescribing practice in
Mekelle, Northern Ethiopia.

\- The World Health Organization (WHO) defines pharmaceutical promotion
as "all information and activities by manufacturers and distributors
aimed at stimulating prescription, supply, purchase and/ or use of
medicinal drugs. Although the WHO standards exist in pharmaceutical
marketing, most medical representatives fail to provide the accurate
information to doctors during their promotional activities.

\- Medical representatives use drug samples, brochures and gifts to help
them during their promotional activities. And, many prescribers are
given pens, notepads and coffee mugs so that the name of a targeted drug
stays in subconscious mind of the prescribers.

\- The questionnaire prepared for this study includes 2 types of
questions;

Questions on the socio-demographic characteristics of the physician:
age, gender, religion, average monthly income, year of experience,
qualification and prescribing practice.

Questions about drug promotion and prescribing practice.

\- The results of this study showed that 97, 6% of physicians were
visited by medical representatives (MRs) and 48, 2% of physicians spent
2-10 minutes for discussion with MRs.

\- Concerning the use of electronic media, it is the least commonly used
promotional methods.

\- In addition 48.2% of the physicians believed that MRs influenced
their prescribing pattern and 65% of physicians dissatisfied in the
current way of drug promotion.

\- This study found that 84.3% of information provided by medical
representatives to physicians concerns the brand name of a product and
30, 1 % about drug indication while 63,9% of physicians said that MRs
had never informed the made-quietly and accurately. Only 3.6% of
respondents believed that MRs focused on the scientific background of
their product.

\- Medical textbooks (56.6%) and academic journals (14.5%) are the most
frequent resources used in the event of any problem with the
prescription.

\- The acceptance of gifts by physicians has 6 times more influence on
their prescribing pattern than physicians who do not accept gifts
provided by medical representative. Also, doctors working in private
health facilities were almost 13 times more likely to be influenced to
change their prescribing practices by MRs than those in public
facilities.This difference might be due to the reason that public health
institutions in Ethiopia are supplied their pharmaceutical consumptions
by government agency, which were generic drugs.

\- Therefore, doctors prescribed the drugs available in the stock,
regardless of the types of drugs being promoted. At the other end,
doctors working in private health facilities would be more influenced
because the practice in its nature has commercial elements.

**Drug promotion in a Resource constrained Nigerian Environment: A Cross
sectional Study of the Influence of Pharmaceutical Sales Representatives
on the Prescribing Behaviors of Medical Practitioners in Abia State
\[2\]**

\- Different methods are used during drug promotion, such as
face-to-face interviews, conference presentations, exhibits and
materials, continuing medical education / CPD, drug launching, journal
ads, pharmaceutical details and academic details of drugs.

\- Medical research is currently being used as a new marketing strategy
for drugs, including payment for publishing articles on promoted drug
products.

\- 185 private and public medical practitioners participated in this
study.

\- The questionnaire includes questions about socio demographic data,
practice and attitude to drug promotion, frequency of visits by medical
representatives in the previous 12 months, types of incentives received,
drug promotion methods, drug promotion information, sources of drug
information, and awareness of code of regulation on drug promotion.

\- 89.7% of participants were males and 10, 3% were females.

\- Concerning the visits of medical representatives, All the respondents
were visited by medical representatives in the previous 12 months, 88.6%
of doctors were visited 12 times and above and 11.4% of doctors were
visited 12 times and less in the previous 12 months.

\- 47, 6% of physicians are influenced by medical representatives and
66, 5% of respondents had positive attitude to drug promotion.

\- All of the respondents accepted the gifts and the most common
incentive received by the medical practitioners was branded office
stationeries (pens, jotters, diaries, calendars). Unfortunately
accepting gifts from Medical representatives can lead to a potential
conflicts of interest and dysfunctional relationships, with ethical and
financial dilemma for standard patient care.

\- The most common method of drug promoting used by medical
representatives was clinic in person meeting (face to face); Detailing
aims to provide busy medical practitioners with up-to-date information
on the drugs being promoted and to keep them informed of the latest
developments in the pharmaceutical industry.

\- This study found that the predominant drug information provided by
MRs was both brand name of the drugs and drug indications. None of the
respondents was informed on the boxed warnings for specific medications
which are available in Nigeria.

\- Asking or calling a colleague or pharmacist are the most common
source of drug information (93, 5% of respondents) especially when they
have problems with drug information.

\- Regarding the code of conduct regulating drug promotion, 84.9% of
doctors were aware by the code of ethics and regulation of promotion so
this awareness should be translated to appropriate prescribing practice
and positive attitude towards drug promotion.

-Working in public health facilities was statistically significant for
attitude and prescribing practice.

-The results of this study have shown that doctors in Nigeria allow free
and unrestricted access of medical representatives to doctors during
clinical consultations with patients.

-This study showed the high level of drug promotion induced prescription
practice could be reflection of the frequency of visits and enthusiastic
gifts by the medical representatives to medical practitioners in
Nigeria.

\- Although physicians have the referral capacity to prescribe medicinal
drugs, the drug promotion activities have been widely accused of
changing attitudes in pharmaceutical care, leading to medication errors
and associated challenges.

**Impact of pharmaceutical promotion on prescribing decisions of general
practitioners in Eastern Turkey.\[3\]**

**-** Objective: determine the self-reported impact of pharmaceutical
promotion on the decision-making process of prescription of GPs in
Eastern Turkey.

-152 GPs working in the primary health centers and hospitals in Erzurum
province of Eastern Turkey in 2006 participated in this study (53.3%
were male, and 65.8% were working at primary health care centers.

-The questionnaire includes questions about sociodemographics, number of
patients per day, time per patient, frequency of sales representative
visits to GPs, participation of GPs in training courses on prescribing
(in-service training, drug companies), factors affecting prescribing
decision, reference sources concerning prescribing and self-reported and
self-rated effect of the activities of sales representatives on GPs
prescribing decisions.

\-[The number of patients examined per day]{.underline} can influence
prescribing pattern because the frequency of visits by medical
representatives to the physicians examining a large number of patients
per day may be higher. In addition, high number of patients examined per
day means shorter time per patient and this may affect rational
decision-making process regarding prescription.

\-[Work site]{.underline} can influence also prescribing decision
because daily burden of GPs with regard to number of patients per day in
primary health care settings is relatively higher than that in the
hospitals in Turkey.

\- [Year of practice]{.underline} of GPs may affect prescribing
decisions. The effect of MRs on experienced GPs may be less because more
years of practice years may indicate more experience with the
prescription.

\- Meeting doctors with medical representatives requires adding of
promoted drug to the hospital formulary that can increase the costs of
prescribing drugs and causing a less rational prescribing.

\- 75.6% of the GPs participated in training programs of pharmaceutical
companies and 28.2% had gone into in-service training provided by public
sector on prescribing.

-Concerning the visits of MRs, 72.3% of the physicians were visited by
MRs more than once a month and 61.2% reported that their prescribing
decisions were always affected by MRs activities.

-The self reading after graduation (50.7%) and activities of
pharmaceutical representatives (40.7%) had high effect on the
prescribing decisions. In contrary, Pharmacology courses at medical
school (49.4%) and post-graduate in-service training provided by public
sector (42.1%) had low effect according to the GPs statements.

\- The impact of promotional activities on physicians who participated
in training courses of pharmaceutical companies was significantly higher
on general practitioners who did not participate in any training of
companies.

\- The results of this study demonstrate that the impact of promotional
activities are high on physicians working at primary health care
centers, on physicians whose year of practice was 5 years and under, on
physicians who examined 60 or more patients per day and on physicians
who were visited by MRs more than once a month.

\- Furthermore, the physicians who examined 60 and more patients a day
participated in training courses of pharmaceutical companies more
frequently than the physicians who examined fewer than 60 patients a
day.

\- The quality and content of formal pharmacology education during
medical faculties affected directly the prescribing decision and the
attitudes of GPs towards the relations between doctors and
pharmaceutical companies.

\- The reference resources in case of any problems in prescribing are
drug guides of pharmaceutical companies (73,7%), medical books, and the
documents of pharmaceutical companies.

\- As conclusion, this study shown that primary reference sources
concerning prescribing was commercial information provided by sales
representatives of pharmaceutical companies. All these results indicates
a lack of formal continuing medical education and an adequate monitoring
of prescribing behaviors provided by public sector.

**The Influence of Information, Brand, Medical Representatives and Sales
Promotion on Physician Prescribing Decision \[4\]**

**-**Objective : Determine the influence of four marketing efforts
(available information on a drug, brand of a drug, medical
representatives (MRs) and sales promotion) on the drug prescribing
decisions of physicians in Yemen.

[- Information drug availability and physician prescribing
decision]{.underline}

Unsubstantiated, unscientific and incorrect information can lead the
inappropriate prescribing of medicines, which can affect the treatment
outcome of patients.

Empirical evidence shows that physicians search for drug information in
journal articles; The information contained in medical journals
inadvertently influences doctors\' decision-making regarding the
prescription of medicines.

This study hypothesizes a possible relationship between available
information on a drug and prescribing behavior of physicians.

H1: A significant relationship exists between the availability of drug
information and physicians' decision to prescribe!

[-Pharmaceutical brand and physician prescribing decision]{.underline}

H2: A significant relationship exists between the brand of drug and
physicians' decision-making when prescribing.

[-Sales promotion and physician prescribing decision]{.underline}

Sales promotions can be classified into two categories, namely positive
and negative impact during drug prescribing

Positive promotions play an informative and persuasive role by retaining
an existing relationship and creating physicians' drug
awareness.(Positive impact)

Promotion tools have been reported to reduce the quality of
prescriptions and increase the price of promoted drugs.(Negative impact)

H3: A significant relationship exists between sales promotion and
physician decision to prescribe.

[-The influence of medical representatives (MRS) on physicians'
prescribing decision]{.underline}

H4: A significant relationship exists between the effectiveness of
medical representatives and physicians' prescribing decisions.

As results, this study showed a relationship between branding and the
prescription decision, but information available on a drug, medical
representatives and sales promotion do not influence the prescribing
decision. A plausible justification for this phenomenon may be the
continuous introduction of new products by the pharmaceutical industry,
which makes it more difficult for doctors to join a particular brand.

Only branding had a great impact on prescribing pattern, so it is
necessary for pharmaceutical companies in Yemen to identify doctors who
show their brand description in brand loyalty. On the contrary, since
the brand of drug is associated with a prescription, increased safety
and insurance can help physicians make better decisions about potential
drugs and the benefits of prescribed drugs.

Concerning visits of medical representatives, physicians mentioned
several reasons for declining to meet MRs: bad experience with MRs,
differences about some commercial transactions, lack of conviction about
the product and lack of integrity of MRs. The unethical behavior of some
MRs has also discouraged physicians.

In conclusion, it appears that marketing efforts (MRs and sales
promotion) are ineffective on prescribing decisions, although it can act
as a deterrent and change the prescribing decision.

**References**

1\_Workneh BD, Gebrehiwot MG, Bayo TA, Gidey MT, Belay YB, Tesfaye DM,
et al. Influence of Medical Representatives on Prescribing Practices in
Mekelle, Northern Ethiopia. PLoS ONE, (2016)

2\_ Iloh, Gabriel Pascal, and Miracle Chukwuonye. \"Drug promotion in a
resource-constrained Nigerian environment: A cross-sectional study of
the influence of pharmaceutical sales representatives on the prescribing
behaviors of medical practitioners in Abia State.\" Archives of Medicine
and Health Sciences, vol. 5, no. 2 (2017)

3\_Vancelik, S., Beyhun, N.E., Acemoglu, H. et al. Impact of
pharmaceutical promotion on prescribing decisions of general
practitioners in Eastern Turkey. BMC Public Health 7, 122 (2007).

4\_ Mohsen Ali Murshid and Zurina Mohaidin. The Influence of
Information, Brand, Medical Representatives and Sales Promotion on
Physician Prescribing Decision.Journal of Pharmaceutical Health Services
Research (2018)
