**[Attitudes and interaction between physicians and pharmaceutical
industry]{.underline}**

**Interactions between physicians and the pharmaceutical industry
generally and sales representatives specifically and their association
with physicians' attitudes and prescribing habits: a systematic review
\[1\]**

\- In 2012, \$89.5 billion was spent on physician -pharmaceutical sales
representative that accounted for 60% of the global pharmaceutical
marketing expenditures.

\- 49 studies included in **qualitative synthesis**

\- This study found that physician-pharmaceutical sales representative
interactions are a regular feature in the daily lives of doctors.

\- Most of the physicians meet with sales representative at least once a
month.

\- The frequency of physician-sales representative interactions and
gifts offered varied according to the private and public hospital
setting and the physicians' position.

\- The interaction between residents and sales representatives was
significantly higher at the start of the residency and Junior residents
received twice as free samples than seniors. In addition, more junior
residents felt that pharmaceutical representatives have a valuable
teaching role.

\- The physician specialists interacted with medical representatives and
received more samples and promotional materials than residents.

\- Most common gifts offered by pharmaceutical company:

-   Samples

-   Promotional materials

-   Invitations for dinners

-   Invitations for CMEs

-   Scientific journals

-   Free lunches

\- This study revealed that physicians have a positive attitude towards
medical representatives, they perceived medical representatives as
sources of information and education while some studies report skeptical
attitudes about the contribution of medical representatives to teaching
and education.

\- In addition, physicians considered their colleagues more susceptible
than themselves to PSR marketing strategies and they considered
themselves immune to the influence of gifts.

\- Some studies revealed that accepting samples lead physicians to
prescribe branded drug rather than generic.

\- The majority of attending physicians failed to identify inaccurate
information about the company drug.

\- "The effects of pharmaceutical firm enticements on physician
prescribing patterns. There's no such thing as a free lunch" study shows
a significant increase (three times) in the prescribing rate of two
company drugs after the physicians attended a company-sponsored
symposium with all their expenses covered but still physicians insisted
there was no impact on their prescribing behavior.

\- No significant relationship between attending industry-paid launch
and formulary request for the company\'s drug.

\- A significant relationship between attending company-sponsored CME
events and higher branded drug prescription.

**Attitudes and Relationship between physicians and the pharmaceutical
industry in a Public General Hospital in Lima, Peru (2014) \[2\]**

-In the last decade, total amount invested in research and development
of new drugs equaled total pharmaceutical marketing expenditures

\- Marketing activities:

-   Detailing

-   Gifts to physicians

-   Sponsorship of social activities

-   Support of educational activities

\- A study conducted in Spain reveals that physicians might be aware of
the impact of marketing on their prescribing behavior but they consider
marketing activities ethically acceptable if the patients end up
generating from them.

\- Objective of this study is to explore the interaction and attitudes
of physicians with pharmaceutical company in a general hospital in Lima,
Peru.(148 participants)

\- Results;

-   There is an active relationship between physicians and
    Pharmaceutical company

-   95% of attending and 85,7% of residents have at least one monthly
    interaction with medical representatives.

-   91,2% of physicians received samples.

-   87,8% of physicians received promotional material.

-   81,8% of physicians accepted invitations to dinners with frequency
    of at least once every four months.

-   31,8% of physicians received materials or equipment for professional
    use

-   27,8% of physicians received personal gifts

-   15,5% of physicians received travel expenses to Congress

-   Reasons to accept medical representatives: 81,8% of physicians for
    respecting the another\'s job and 55,2% of physicians to receive
    drug samples.

-   Concerning detailing activities: 75% considered that the information
    brought up by pharmaceutical representatives is ''not trustworthy''
    and 80.3% stated that reps ''prioritize the promotion of their
    products over patients' benefit''. In addition, 47.6% of all
    participants stated that the information provided by pharmaceutical
    representatives helps them ''learn about new products'' and ''stay
    up to date''.

-   88,5% of physicians believe that acceptance of gifts and dinner has
    no impact on prescribing decisions and 35,2% of physicians believe
    that those gifts affect their colleagues' prescriptions.

-   Anesthesiologists reported few numbers of encounters with medical
    representatives and more than half of them believe that most
    promotional activities and gifts affected the prescribing behavior.
    In contrast, pediatricians reported large number of encounters with
    medical representatives and likewise more than half of them didn't
    believe that promotional activities influence prescribing behavior.

-   Concerning drug samples, more than 82% of participants were willing
    to accept medical samples to offer them as free treatment to their
    resource-poor patients. In addition, 88% of them considered the
    acceptance of medical samples is ethical.

\- Many studies revealed that patients that receive drug samples,
usually end-up paying higher amount of money for their medication in the
long run.

\- As conclusion, this study shows a close and active relationship
between physicians and medical representatives.

**Perceptions and Attitudes of Egyptian Health Professionals and
Policy-Makers towards Pharmaceutical Sales Representatives and Other
Promotional Activities (2015) \[3\]**

Objective : Explore and analyze the perceptions and attitudes of
Egyptian physicians and pharmacists towards Pharmaceutical Marketing.

-Egypt, as the largest Arab middle-income country, with a population of
about 85 million people and central to modern Middle Eastern politics,
plays an influential role for pharmaceutical companies' promotional
strategies.

-47 pharmaceutical producers active in Egypt; 37 belonging to the public
sector, 4 producers for the local private sector and 6 multinationals.
Multinational and local private companies own more than half of the
total market share.

-The Egyptian Medicines Authority (EDA) is the regulatory body for
safety and quality of pharmaceutical products, conducting pharmaceutical
practices and providing high-quality medicines at reasonable prices. In
2011, EDA established the Marketing and Media Control Department with
the aim of reviewing and ensuring the safety of promotional materials
and regulating the activities of the scientific offices of
pharmaceutical companies.

\- A qualitative study was conducted. ( Interviews with physicians and
pharmacists)

**-**Attitudes of physicians and dentists towards promotional activities
and sales representatives;

All physicians and dentists were aware of the business relationship with
pharmaceutical company.

**Gifts** offered to physicians: drug samples, office supplies, cash and
invitations to conferences or sponsored continuing medical education
(CME) events.

Concerning the **information** **delivered by medical representatives**,
The physicians interviewed felt that information often favored the
medication of a particular company. They usually felt that they had not
received clinical trial reports or other scientific publications, unless
specifically requested from them. For older physicians, better quality
information was delivered by sales representatives trained in pharmacy
or those employed by multinational companies.

About **conferences** and continuing medical education, senior
physicians describe it as important but Junior physicians are more
interested in obtaining scientific articles and less attracted by
sponsored seminars.

Regarding **ethical promotion**, physicians interviewed considered
promotion involving scientific content but when promotion could harm
patients it is considered as unethical.

-Prescribers\' beliefs about influences on prescribing decisions;

**Sources of information used during prescribing decisions:** medical
studies, scientific conferences, textbooks, scientific journals,
individual experiences with pharmacological treatment, university staff
prescription habits and available information on the Internet.

As results of this study, physicians did not feel influenced by
pharmaceutical promotion in their prescription habits and it was
mentioned that adjuvants and non-prescription medicines were more easily
overprescribed than prescription medicines.

-Pharmacists' attitudes towards pharmaceutical promotion;

Pharmacists had various attitudes towards pharmaceutical promotion.

"In Egypt, promotion is about financial promotion, not ethical
promotion. So it is about how much profit you make, not whether this is
an effective medicine" says one pharmacist.

In addition, pharmacists noted that they are aware of the incentives
given to doctors to influence their prescribing pattern. This appears
when doctors prescribe unnecessary medications.

-Prescribers and pharmacists awareness and opinions towards regulation
of promotion;

There is a lack of knowledge and awareness of existing legal
regulations.

-The doctors interviewed reported that they did not question accepting
gifts of little or no financial value, but they were often reluctant to
receive high-value gifts, describing them as bribes. We found that some
considered promotional gifts bearing the name of a drug useful as a
reminder of that name, which actually seemed to match the intentions of
the pharmaceutical industry. Doctors who admitted accepting gifts
probably did this because receiving gifts from drug companies was
considered a common and accepted practice in Egypt and elsewhere.

-The reported visit frequency varied according to the physicians'
seniority in our rather selective and small sample this should be
interpreted with caution. However, by comparison, the frequency of the
reported visit was higher than that reported in Turkey, Tunisia, Libya,
and Canada.

-The physicians considered the continued medical education (CME) events
to be of high quality, but considered that juxtaposition of information
and promotion was inconvenient.

-While the physicians give free medical samples to patients with poor
social and economic conditions, it was demonstrate that availability of
samples increases prescribing of the same brands, makes physicians adopt
new drugs faster and shifts prescribing decisions towards less
appropriate choices.

**References**

1-Fickweiler F, Fickweiler W, Urbach E. Interactions between physicians
and the pharmaceutical industry generally and sales representatives
specifically and their association with physicians' attitudes and
prescribing habits: a systematic review. BMJ Open 2017

2- DeFerrariA, GentilleC, DavalosL, HuayanayL, MalagaG. Attitudes and
Relationship between Physicians and the Pharmaceutical Industry in a
Public General Hospital in Lima, Peru. PLoS ONE 2014

3- Kamal S, Holmberg C, Russell J, Bochenek T, Tobiasz-Adamczyk B,
Fischer C, et al. Perceptions and Attitudes of Egyptian Health
Professionals and Policy-Makers towards Pharmaceutical Sales
Representatives and Other Promotional Activities. PLoS ONE 2015
